Damna tion. Thus the p arish pries t held enormous p ower o ver the liv es o f his p arishioners. Ultima tely, the p ope decide d all ma tters o f theolog y, interpreting the will o f Go d to the p eople, but he also had authority o ver temp oral ma tters. Bec ause the Church had the a bility to e xcommunic ate p eople, or send a soul to hell f orev er, even monarchs f eared to challeng e its p ower. It w as also the se at of all kno wledge. Latin, the langua ge of the Church, ser ved as a unif ying factor f or a c ontinent o f isola ted regions, each with its o wn dialect; in the e arly Middle Ag es, nations as w e kno w them to day did not y et exist. The mos tly illitera te ser fs were thus dep endent on those litera te pries ts to re ad and interpret the Bible, the w ord o f Go d, for them.

CHRISTIANIT Y ENCOUNTERS ISLAM

The y ear 622 brought a new challeng e to Chris tendom. Near Mec ca, Sa udi Ara bia, a prophet name d Muhammad rec eived a rev elation tha t became a c orners tone o f the Islamic faith. The Koran containe d his mes sage, affirming monotheism but identif ying Chris t not as Go d but as a prophet lik e Moses, Abraham, David, and Muhammad. Following Muhammad ’s de ath in 632, Islam spre ad b y both c onversion and militar y conques t acros s the Middle Eas t and Asia Minor to India and nor thern Afric a, cros sing the Straits o f Gibraltar into S pain in the y ear 711 ( Figure 1.14 ).

FIGURE 1.14 In the se venth and eighth c enturies, Islam spr ead quickl y acr oss Nor th Africa and int o the Middle East. The r eligion arriv ed in Eur ope via Spain in 711 and r emained ther e until 1492, when Catholic monar chs reconquer ed the las t of Muslim-held t errit ory aft er a long w ar. The Islamic c onques t of Europ e continue d until 732. Then, at the Ba ttle o f Tours (in mo dern F ranc e), Charles Mar tel, nickname d the Hammer, led a Chris tian f orce in def eating the arm y of Ab dul Rahman al-Gha fiqi. Muslims, however, retaine d control o f much o f Spain, where C órdob a, kno wn f or le ather and w ool pro duction, became a major c enter o f learning and trade. By the elev enth c entur y, a major Chris tian holy w ar called the Reconquis ta, or rec onques t, had b egun to slo wly push Muslims from S pain. With the s tart of the Crusades, the wars b etween Chris tians and Muslims f or domina tion o f the Holy Land (the Biblic al region o f Pales tine), Chris tians in S pain and around Europ e began to see the Reconquis taas p art of a larg er religious s truggle with Islam.

CLICK AND EXPL ORE Visit EyeWitnes s to His tory (http://openstax.org/l/cr usades) to re ad a p ersonal ac count o f the C rusades.

JER USALEM AND THE CR USADES

The city o f Jerusalem is a holy site f or Jews, Chris tians, and Muslims. It w as here King Solomon built the Temple in the tenth c entur y BCE. It w as here the R omans cr ucifie d Jesus in 33 CE, and from here, Chris tians maintain, he asc ende d into he aven, promising to return. From here, Muslims b eliev e, Muhammad tra veled to heaven in 621 to rec eive ins tructions a bout pra yer. Thus claims on the are a go deep, and emotions a bout it r un high, among f ollowers o f all three faiths. Evidenc e exists tha t the three religions liv ed in harmon y for c enturies. 20 1 • The Americas , Eur ope, and Africa Bef ore 1492 Access for fr ee a t opens tax. org.